---
layout: post
title: "CapiTainS 2.0.0 Release: changes, renewal and the future"
description: ""
category: "Milestones"
tags: [milestone,release]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

*Written by [Thibault Clérice](https://github.com/ponteineptique) \[[Twitter](https://github.com/twitter)\]*

## What's up ?

We are happy to announce the release of CapiTainS Guidelines 2.0.0. The main event behind this is the release of a 7 months long run and a 
major change for myself as the main developer behind the CapiTainS suite. CapiTainS has now been an organization pushed by both the Chair 
of Digital Humanities at the University of Leipzig and Tufts University through both Perseus and Perseids projects.

If you were wonderings, texts following the guidelines of CapiTainS represents currently the following numbers (As of April, 28th. 2017) with its main known repositories: 

| Repository                                        | Texts | Total (Words) | Ancient Greek | Latin     | English   | German  | French | Unknown |
|---------------------------------------------------|-------|---------------|---------------|-----------|-----------|---------|--------|---------|
| https://github.com/OpenGreekAndLatin/First1KGreek | 641   | 18.038.636    | 17.554.353    |           | 244.848   | 161.465 |        |         |
| https://github.com/OpenGreekAndLatin/csel-dev     | 278   | 6.055.446     |               | 6.055.446 |           |         |        |         |
| https://github.com/PerseusDL/canonical-latinLit   | 390   | 8.324.065     |               | 5.073.035 | 2.646.765 |         |        | 604.265 |
| https://github.com/PerseusDL/canonical-greekLit   | 368   | 8.294.584     | 1.770.357     | 1912      | 4.062.712 | 459.555 | 1912   |         |
| https://github.com/nevenjovanovic/cts-croala      | 467   | 5.700.000     |               | 5.700.00  |           |         |        |         |

Which sums up to a wonderful **46 millions** tokens large corpus.

## Changes and the Future of the organization

### Changes for CapiTainS

The CapiTainS organization decided to go wider than just Citable Text Services and it led to a complete rework of the python software suite that we developed. This decision was driven by the simple observation that CTS does not match everyones need and will probably never do. As such, we asked ourselves : what's the goal of CapiTainS ? The goal of CapiTainS is to offer to any one the ability to :

- serve texts through API and User Interface without having to care too much about producing the API. This is why, even though you could build you own interface, Nautilus remains an excellent piece of software to serve your text according to good standards,
- browse texts and collections from a Command Line Interface or local software, reuse text in "local" studies such as Named Entity tagging or corpus linguistic
- help people to reuse texts produce by other in other contexts

The new CapiTainS is essentially upgraded to match this. Unfortunately, we did not have the time to improve the Javascript library Sparrow and we take the chance in this blog post to call for anyone willing to apply the same changes we did to MyCapytain to Sparrow. CapiTainS Sparrow is looking for a developer to help it evolve along CapiTainS !

### Future

CapiTainS is gonna live at a smaller pace in the coming month : for one, I will be moving to a new position but not as an engineer. While I will take my role of maintainer really seriously on MyCapytain, Nemo and Nautilus, there won't be any major release. This is both a good news and a bad news in the end : we get to have a longer release lifecycle. This also means that the future of CapiTainS as a provider of new software tiles is a bit blurry : the main software producer will become Perseids most probably, and certainly the DH Chair at the University of Leipzig will continue to do some work.

Fortunately, we wrote everything to be sustainable : you have got documentation (we tried to write it well), you've got unit tests, you have even got Puppet modules thanks to Bridget Almas and the Perseids Team! In order to leave CapiTainS outlive this time, we also decided to move HookTest to be more decentralized : you can know run HookTest with Travis on Github ! There is no more needs for a fancy 32 cores computer to run these tests !

## Then, let's go down to business : the softwares and guidelines' update

### Guidelines 2.0.0

The guidelines have been updated to take into account two changes that felt needed in a web 3.0 world and in a philological world : we added the `<structured-metadata>` node to every collection-level node (textgroup, work, version). This [node](http://purl.org/capitains/ns/1.0#structured-metadata) allows for expressing triple whose subject is the collection described ! Isn't it wonderful ?

The second and thired node are something we discussed for a long time and facing the need of one of OpenGreekAndLatin repositories we decided to add : `cts:commentary` and its child `cts:about`. While this is not part of the CTS Scheme originally, this allows to produce, in the context of a CTS URN, a commentary text which is linked to the text it talks about through the `cts:about` link. 

You can checkout the [examples in the guidelines ](http://capitains.org/pages/guidelines).

**There is a short future** for CapiTainS Guidelines : we hope to release soon enough 2.1.0 guidelines that would provide support for non-cts based collection while following the same scheme. If we can, we'll try to do something like this and implement it in related tools before December 2017. But let's not bet our life on it, except if you are willing to code it ;)

### MyCapytain 2.0.0

MyCapytain has had a quite thourough rework where the API was cleaned, the Object Oriented Programming took its sense by reworking dependency. But the most important changes were structural : 

- The whole system of metadata is stored in a RDF Triple Store (In Memory or can be stored somewhere else, because it's based on [RDFLib](https://github.com/RDFLib/rdflib))
- When CTS Text and Passage were the god of the classes, they are now merely humans : we rework the whole system so that more kind of texts can be treated with the same tool
- Every object that can be [exported](http://mycapytain.readthedocs.io/en/latest/MyCapytain.classes.html#exportable-parent-classes) now use the common export system `self.export(output)` where output should be an item from the `MyCapytain.common.constants.Mimetype`. This means that you should find really quickly how to export a text to Plain/Text or TEI XML !
- We added a new kind of class : [Resolvers](http://mycapytain.readthedocs.io/en/latest/MyCapytain.classes.html#resolvers. Resolvers are meant as tool with a really simple api (getMetadata, getTextualNode, getSiblings, getReffs) that will always return the same kind of object. This means that, whether you use a remote CTS API, a local CapiTainS repository (or any other system implemented later in MC), your code should not change !

### Flask Capitains Nemo 1.0.0 and Nautilus 1.0.0

Both Nemo and Nautilus are mostly upgraded thanks to the MyCapytain upgrade. The app changes themselves are really small but some changes made on MyCapytain were specifically targeting web use of resources. This means that Nemo and Nautilus are now much, much faster and more stable !

**Flask CapiTainS Nemo** was in 1.0.0 beta for a long time, and we did not release it before moving to CapiTainS 2.0.0. Flask CapiTainS Nemo 1.0.0 had the following changes : 

- Plugin development. Nemo can now be enhanced through plugins that will be loaded easily
- End of the CTS-dependancy and friendly routes : the new system already allows for different identifier and deep collections system. It's just up to you to develop the resolver !
- Better base templates (It was about time !)
- Better (Much better) Cache handling

**Nautilus** on its end has been simplified a lot to server two different purposes : **providing Web API services** for MyCapytain resolver (with an eye set on providing soon OAI-PMH and a Sparql endpoint) and **providing a caching system for live web services**. We can say proudly that this has been achieved !

### HookTest and HookUI

`Thibault Clérice, Matthew Munson, & Bridget Almas. (2017). Capitains/HookTest: 1.0.0 [Data set]. Zenodo. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.569841`

`Thibault Clérice. (2017). Capitains/Hook: 1.0.0 [Data set]. Zenodo. http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.555931`

Those are the software that have known the biggest changes and might change a lot how we perceived corpora production. As of 1.0.0 for both these software, HookTest and HookUI can be installed with really small web instances (heck, even the new http://ci.perseids.org is now run on a free Amazon AWS !). The reason for it ? We decentralized !

[HookTest](https://github.com/capitains/HookTest) can now be run easily with [Travis](http://travis-ci.org/) (*and the output looks like https://travis-ci.org/PerseusDL/canonical-greekLit/builds/226562703*). But most of all, HookTest can now help you build releases with only completely compatible texts. Do that, connect your repository on Zenodo and you get an automatic DOI for every version of your corpus ! Isn't it nice ?

[Hook](https://github.com/capitains/Hook)

Oh, and even better, both those software are finally tested with a coverage > 90%. The testing suite is tested !

## Now ?

Now we are gonna take some vacations and try to explain to people why it would be great to collaborate on this suite. We truly believe CapiTainS and its python suite could fit the need of a lot of projects and we hope that people see that. It might need some customization, some better documentation but we cannot do that without you asking question (and as we say in French : *we have never eaten anybody !*). We also think we lack at least one piece of software, which would be a text search engine. We have ideas but not the time for the moment. Maybe you do ? 

We hope that this software will be helpful to you. This is a major milestone, maybe the biggest since the first tool released in here. See you around !

*Thibault* and hopefully all other past and present collaborators : Bridget Almas, Matthew Munson, Stella Dee, Frederik Baumgardt.